---
title: "Why I built LANBucket"
date: 2026-05-16
summary: ""
---
Land parties have always been a big part of my life. For the last 15 years or so I've hosted a land party at least once a year if not twice a year. Over the years obviously a lot of things have changed in the tech industry as computers have gotten faster and what commodity hardware looks like has improved substantially. I remember distinctly when we were first throwing these things in a dingy basement in my friend's dingy basement I should say that largest problem was the under powered hardware that was in commodity laptops at the time. We had to work really hard to find games that everyone's computers could even managed to load in nonetheless actually play smoothly. This period of time gave me a huge appreciation for older classic Win 32 games. I'm talking about Command and Conquer Red Alert 2 the Civilization series the Age of Empires series etc. These games I feel fundamentally respected players more than modern live service games. All these years later this type of game is still what we play at the land parties I host.


 now the big problem that we have perennially is file distribution. Over the last decade I've tried every solution under the sun to try to ameliorate this problem. They all have drawbacks that are imperfect and I've never found a solution that works perfectly for my use case. I've heard many suggestions over the years and all of them had at least one problem that I found blocking. Many of you reading this are probably thinking of solutions for how to distribute a file to a handful of players at a land party right now but I assure you that if you thought of it in the last 30 seconds I have thought of it at some point over the last 10 years. A frustration of mine that I've always had that in this brave new world of cloud computing the most accepted and perhaps less frictionless The most frictionless way of transmitting a file between two computers even if they're sitting right next to each other connected over LAN has become uploading that file to some data center halfway across the country and then having your buddy download it back from that said data center using some cloud storage provider like Onedrive or Google Drive or Dropbox etc. I understand why these solutions have proliferated for the simple ease of use and you know it does what it says on the tin type promises but I find it intellectually dissatisfying that to travel for a bite to travel six feet it must first travel a 1000 miles.

 Header.: solutions I've tried.

 The simplest thing I've tried to distribute a file to all of my players before they arrive at the LAN party is to tell them to download it ahead of time. This seems like the simplest, easiest way to do it. In fact. In some sense, it's the most efficient. You upload the file once and you distribute a link. Umm, to some cloud storage provider? The same ones that I was complaining about last paragraph. And then your users download the file and then perhaps install the game before they arrive. As simple as this may sound, in practice I have discovered that almost no one will do this. Your players are already. Promising you a lot. To show up to your land party, you know, in my case land parties when I was in high school were 24 hour events., Now that I am in my 20s, you know, 12 hours is a more reasonable figure. Even still asking for 12 hours of someone's time, even if it's to do something fun, it is a big request, so it's not super surprising that people. Don't want to think too hard about doing homework before they arrive.. In fact, it's bad enough that I'm also asking my players to disassemble the desktop PCS for those of them who do not have gaming laptops to show up to my house.. So in practice, this is not a workable solution, at least not for the friends I have. If your friends are more conscientious, perhaps this will work for you. LOL.


 The next, perhaps most obvious solution is to pass around a flash drive. In fact, if you have the cash on hand, just by 10 flash drives or 16 flash drives. For the record, my parties are on about that scale. The largest I've ever held was. 35 players and the smallest I'll do something like eight. So you could in practice by. Let's say 16 flash drives and flash onto them. The games you want to play as zipped archives and then hand out the flash drives and everyone shows up and. Everyone copies the files off. While this does work, I find it. Very inelegant and rather annoying. You suddenly have this problem of needing to spend a bunch of time serially copying data onto these flash drives before the LAN party. And you also. Don't have a lot of recourse if you make a mistake. And you flash the wrong file. Suddenly you not need to update all 16 of these things. This also is missing a certain social element that we'll come back to later. In other words, if someone at the LAN party shows up with something that they think everyone else ought to have. Even if it's just a meme or something. It's kind of a pain for them to, you know, flash that onto a flash drive and then. Run it around, sneaker net style, to everyone at the party. It is much more convenient if there would be a way for that guy to share it with everyone without needing to do this manual physical step.. There are other logistical concerns too with the flash drive idea. Up to and including needing to. Manage these things in inventory, so to speak. If I buy 16 high speed flash drives, I don't want to lose them every single time I throw a party. If these things are going to be disposable, effectively they need to be really cheap. But really cheap. Flash drives are really slow and are a huge pain.


 Another idea that gets proposed a lot is using. Again, Cloud Storage to distribute these files and then get the link to everyone at the party and they'll just download it. While you're sitting there. Now, in truth, Internet speeds have. Picked up quite a bit since I was in high school, and in fact at my house I have Gigabit Internet service. The problem is if you're transferring a 10 gigabyte file and you've got 16 players sitting at the table. Suddenly you're actually downloading one 60 gigabytes over the Internet even though there's really only 10 real gigabytes of payload there. You're just duplicating the work a bunch of times. This also means that you're splitting your Gigabit connection 16 ways, so everyone's only actually getting. 1000 over 16 megabits per second. For smaller files, maybe this is acceptable, but again, these games sometimes get big, so this performance problem becomes substantial. There's also a bootstrapping problem with this approach. How do I get this link to all of my players the URL? You could. Use something like Discord or. Facebook Messenger or something to send the link to everyone, but that also assumes that everyone is in. This. Application already, you're already friends. Quote UN quote with them. And that they're even willing to use this particular social media platform. Ultimately, party planning is a social problem, not a technology problem. And. Convincing. A group of highly opinionated nerds to use a particular platform. Ahead of time, especially a social platform that may or may not have, umm, data privacy concerns. Is difficult and perhaps even intractable. So whatever solution we come up with needs to be zero configuration and require no accounts, no setup, no personally identifiable information, etc. Etc..


 So a solution that I've tried a couple times is why don't you just host a little local HTTP server on your? Network. There's a bunch of really easy ways to do this. Python has a. Simple HTTP server umm that you can just launch from the REPL and there's a number of other. Similar sort of portable exe. Run a web server type products. This is pretty good. 0 configuration on the part of all of your guests. But it has. A perhaps silly problem, but you now have to tell all of your guests to type in an IP address in their web browser. Now you might think that the population who would go to a land party would be completely willing to type in an IP address in their web browser and be this would be natural to them. But what I've observed in practice is this ends up being a huge pain point. Where you have to literally go around to people's computers and like type the IP address into the address bar for them because they're not capable of figuring out how to do this on their own. Now your mileage may vary. On this particular aspect of this, but this is just what I have observed over the years. Now, in fairness. An addendum to this that I have. I had not considered until a friend brought it up to me while I was already working on land bucket. What if instead of typing an IP address? You registered a DNS. Entry that just pointed to your local IP address. And I didn't know that this was possible. It never occurred to me to do it, but sure enough, this does actually work. The downside is. You still don't get. Well, what I should say is, there's still a bottleneck. You have one computer who has these files, and you're distributing its bandwidth N ways for all of your clients. Your guests, I should say. So for example, that same problem, the 10 Gigabit file that you're sharing with 16 guests, you're still splitting a 1GIGABIT connection 16 ways. We'll insert the calculation of how long that should take here.. The other problem is this doesn't have a good social sharing story.. These simple HTTP servers that exist are largely static and there isn't really an easy way. For other users to upload files. Umm, for you to view. Uh, for you to share with everyone else. And then also, you know it still moves the burden onto the host, and it requires the host to be technically knowledgeable enough to set up this simply GTP server and it has a configuration burden that the host has to do this at the start of the line party every time.

 In a similar vein a solution I've tried before is using samba shares or file shares on Windows. This can work however it has some of the similar problems as the web server idea. In theory you should be able to set up a file share that allows reads and writes which should solve your sort of social elements however in practice Windows has banned the use of passwordless file shares authenticationless file shares in recent versions of Windows 11 for security concerns. And in fairness I actually agree with Microsoft here I think that for general use cases password lists are authentication lists file shares is a really bad idea. With that said it was a really convenient way to solve this problem back in the day. Though it does also have the problem that you need to communicate to your guests either the IP address or the DNS name of your host machine. And these DNS issues are something I should touch about more here because you might think 0 I can set my machine name to something memorable and tell everyone 0 go to you know Justin machine in explorer File Explorer. In practice this does not work for a lot of users because they will have intentionally overridden their DNS configuration instead of pointing to your local router's DNS pointing to Cloudflare or Google's DNS servers 1.1.1.1or 8.8.8.8 By either setting some sort of password which I think should work or by sharing the file sharing the share folder with everyone's Microsoft accounts explicitly explicitly adding each one to the permission list. While this would work really well in an enterprise environment in your sort of home scenario not only does this violate our zero configuration principle it also is a huge pain in the ass and no one wants to do that. And you end up fighting the settings that everyone has set on their individual machines for their Windows firewall settings and whatnot.


 Another solution. Is just give everyone their own computer and you've preloaded everything. If you've heard of. The Kenton LAN party house, and we'll insert a link to that here. You'll note that this type of thing is possible. Unfortunately, I don't have the time or money or approval from my wife to. Set up an entire floor of my house dedicated to land parties. So this is a non starter for me and also totally violates our zero configuration principles. LOL. Though if you have a setup like. Kenton's you probably don't need a solution like land bucket anyway, but Kenton if you're reading this. I still think that your place is pretty cool. LOL.

Header: enter lanbucket

 This is where land bucket. Comes in. Land Bucket works by using multicast traffic and a number of fall back techniques to discover all the other users running land bucket on your local network. By installing land bucket from the Windows Store we also get automatic updates and things like this which also make the user experience easier because then you don't have to worry about what if the 2 versions of the client are out of sync and that causing compatibility issues down the road. Landbucket uses distributed file transfers based on the Bittorrent protocol using Arvid. Norberg. Bittorrent implementation called libtorrent. The idea here is that when you're transferring a large file to a bunch of users, as soon as those users start getting a little piece of the file on their machine, they can immediately start. Swarming and sharing that data with the other peers who are attempting to download it at the same time. In my testing. This can provide. Umm. Substantial performance wins over normal traditional umm. Serialized can transfers like in the web server model. Line bucket also provides a very simple user experience. The idea was to replicate the user experience of. Something akin to a shared folder in one of these cloud storage providers like Onedrive. The view on the right. In the main page of land bucket shows all of the content that everyone has shared with the network. And users can. Download umm. Files with a single click or they can share files by clicking dragging them in. This I think provides a very simple and understandable. User experience and models the exact interactions that I'm trying to have. In other words, I'm not trying to allow users to share things privately amongst themselves. The idea is. To facilitate this interaction. Some guy at the party turns, everyone says hey, I've got this really cool thing you should all look at if any clicks and drags it into land bucket and then everyone can just click download. Right away. And you know, a couple of moments later, everyone has it, no matter what that is, a game or a movie or, you know, some memes or whatever.

There are a number of alternative solutions to this problem that I won't go into too much detail about here. Including things like using SFTP or SSH to communicate. Between the computers sitting in front of you, I'll say that these are not tractable if most of your guests. Aren't even comfortable typing in IP addresses. Not to mention the fact. That almost all my guests are Windows users. I myself am a Windows guy. I always have been. I haven't really loved Linux. But with that said, I do want. To add Linux support to land bucket at some point in the future. So anything that requires the command line is also a non starter. It's not going to work for us here. There are other no configuration file sharing tools that already exist. Umm, there's. A handful that do the same sort of local network zero configuration. Peer discovery that land bucket provides. And there's even D LAN which does the peer discovery. And does distributed transfers which land bucket also provides. I don't mean any. Disrespect to the developers of D LAN. However, I did find their UI to be needlessly complex and. Not a good fit for my non technical users. It's UX abstraction is I find a little bit. Verbose. And doesn't provide the sort of. Low friction. Golden path that I want for land bucket. D Land is a really cool tool. I'd recommend checking it out. Perhaps it would be a better fit for you than Land Bucket. Uh, but I do think that land bucket provides. A more. Modern. UX experience. As opposed to DLAN.

Header: results

I've successfully deployed land bucket at two LAN parties now to beta test it. In both cases what my users and Get Party guests were excited about was just the simplicity. It let us spend more time dealing with setting up the games that we are playing and less time dealing with transferring files back and forth and making sure everyone had everything that they needed. I even observed users doing things like sending little batch scripts to each other over the network or sending memes to each other that type of thing. I've spent about a year working on Land Bucket and I've spent a lot of time hardening it So I feel like it's it's relatively stable at this point. Since land bucket is fundamentally based off of Bittorrent the you may have questions about security and stability and what I'll say is that line bucket strips out Landbucket simplifies the Bittorrent protocol in a number of ways Umm to improve performance and throughput but as a consequence it removes some features so for example land bucket cannot be used over the open Internet it can only be used on your local network. This I think is actually a security plus. Now the other thing is land bucket does not use any form of encryption. I believe that this is an acceptable security risk Hmm that's not quite the right word we'll workshop that. I believe that there is not a security boundary between yourself and your land party guests. In other words if someone wanted to install malware on my computer or the computers of the other party guests they wouldn't need to man in the middle the land bucket peer discovery algorithm or the Lib torrent umm sorry Bittorrent protocol instead they could just wrap up a virus and share it on land bucket by callingitgame.Exe. To that end I only suggest using land bucket amongst trusted participants like your personal friends at a land party in your house that type of thing. I also wouldn't recommend using land bucket at large public land parties for justice the same reason because I wouldn't recommend downloading an XE that some stranger suggests you run I understand that there are ways to verify the digital signatures of executables that you download from an untrusted party but I think that for a non technical audience they should exercise caution using this tool with strangers.

 I hope that you find time to try out land bucket and I hope that it is useful for you at your land parties or just for sharing files around the house if you have like me a dozen or so computers in every room of your house You can find Land Bucket at Landbucket COM or in the Microsoft Store
